### In Class Essay 

Data science has completely transomed the world we live in today. From convolutional neural networks, to K-Nearest Neighbors, the number of fields that data science can be applied to is infinite. Reflecting back to Owen Barder’s podcast, “Development and Complexity,” I began to further understand the evolutionary aspect of data science. One of the major feats seen in data science, is its ability to adapt and transform as needed. Specifically, in terms of a complex adaptive system (made up of adaptive people, products, and intuitions, that all work together to create a functioning, successful society), data science needs to continue to change and adapt to its environment in order to be successful. A Complex Adaptive System is continuously changing, and it can be extremely difficult to tailor a specific solution to a problem. With this in mind, it is important to note that with the idea of change and adaptability, data scientists can continue to develop solutions. On the economic side of things, Barder expands on the history of “Nokia.” Beginning as a company that sold rubber boots, Nokia understood the changes in their environment, and began to develop telecommunication devices, which greatly succeeded. However, after the introduction of smart phones, Nokia’s profits rapidly declined as they failed to adapt to their environment and create their own smart phones. This is a common occurrence we see today, as companies are continually trying to improve their products, tailoring them to fit their current environment. 

Through the successes we have seen in data science, the past years have broadened our understanding and research on agent-based modeling. Agent-based modeling is a data science method used for different fields including business models, medicine, and disease transmission. An agent-based model consists of a few different elements that interact with one another: agents, the environment, the relationship between agents, the relationship between agents and the environment, and time. Although people often think that agents can only represent humans, this is a large misconception. Agent based modeling works to model real life situations using agents, the environment, and the interaction between the two. During the large Ebola outbreak in 2014, scientists made use of agent-based models (and gravity models) to get a better understanding of how and where the disease was moving. A gravity model, which works to determine the interaction between two distinct locations, as well as the movement of individuals from different locations, was also a commonly used tool in developing a better understanding of the disease transmission. In the age of the Coronavirus, I believe that agent-based modelling can greatly improve our understanding of the transmission of the disease. Current research has shown the efficacy of this method –– by creating a program that can model different situations including lockdowns, isolations, use of face masks, etc., this program has the ability to help us understand how different situations can affect the outcome of transmission. Specifically, in social situations, agent-based modeling can be used to model human behavior to give us a relatively accurate representation of real life situations.   

Agent Based Modeling has a wide range of applications –– from understanding disease transmission, and how different companies will interact with each other, to even determining how individuals get to work every day. A recent study showed the application of agent-based modeling in improving the accuracy of air bags in a car. By using a human (and human behavior) as an agent, and putting the car in different situations (changing of environments), the ABM was able to greatly improve the accuracy of the air bags, and let the developer know which parts needed work. As we can see, the accomplishments of agent-based modeling and data science are endless. However, there are some downfalls that come with the fascinating program. Although ABM is able to model the behavior and movement of humans, it can be difficult to correctly model situations where human behavior is hard to predict. It is important to train the model on accurate data that will give it the opportunity to learn and predict accordingly. In terms of Barder’s Nokia example above, the use of an agent-based model could have been very beneficial in understanding how the sales of different companies would do. By creating an agent-based model that described the sale patterns and profits of Nokia with their old product, and comparing it to the profits and sale patterns with a new and improved product (smart phone), Nokia would have realized the importance of adapting and improving their product (seeing that the model showed better results with the newer product). 

With the pervasiveness of data science today, there is no doubt that there have been some downfalls. The presence of data science (specifically large amounts of data) has caused rampant fear regarding privacy among individuals. Big Tech companies (including Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, etc.) that have access to copious amount of personal data are often the target of these fears. People often wonder where their data is going, and what these companies are doing with their data. Furthermore, the opacity of these companies is a large concern, as individuals have noted that Big Tech companies are not always clear about their intentions. We've all had the experience of talking about/looking up a specific item, and the next thing we know, our entire explore page/ads are targeted to this same item. For most people, this is a major invasion of privacy, making it difficult to know how much these Big Tech companies are collecting from us. Furthermore, shifting gears to disease transmission, during the Ebola outbreak, tracking phones was critical in order to see where the disease was spreading. Although this surveillance was necessary during the public health emergency, it began to rise suspicion regarding how frequently these surveillance methods (of the movement of people) were actually being collected. 

In general, I believe the pros outweigh the cons when it comes to data science and agent-based modeling. These new, and continuously improving methods are giving scientists a better understanding of human behavior and movement. Even for smaller scale models like using ABM to improve the traffic on a populated highway, we can see large improvements in our everyday lives. 
   
